---
categories: blog
author: anderote
---

Distinguished New-Age Hippie and professional psychonaut Terence McKenna once claimed that one of the smartest things you can do in life is to take LSD, only perhaps beaten by the idea to take LSD with a sober person acting as 'sitter.' If you replace "LSD" with "visiting Prague" then I'd pretty much agree, including the part about having a more travel-experienced veteran tag along to supervise the trip. The only thing better looking than the buildings in Prague are the people who live inside them, and whether you're a fan of Terence McKenna's 'Timewave Zero' theory of fractal singularities, or just a Hapsburg history buff, the trip is well worth the time it takes to get there. 

Prague is the de facto capital of Central Europe, and a former capital city of the Habsburg Dynasty between 1583–1611. Indeed, quite a number of Habsburg's spent their time in Prague, holding court and progressively inbreeding themselves into the further reaches of genetic decrepitude. Taking their name from the Habsburg Castle in Switzerland, the family dynasty came to dominate much of European political affairs throughout the 16th, 17th and 18th century, with their ancestral family holdings in property becoming known as the Austro-Hungarian Empire. But, the Habsburgs were a romantic bunch, and armed with their family motto which admonishes young Habsburgians to "Leave the waging of wars to others! But you, happy Austria, marry; for the realms which Mars awards to others, Venus transfers to you" - soon found their relatives in control of places like Spain, Milan, Tuscany, Sicily, Netherlands. Even Austrian Emporer Franz-Josef's brother did a stint as 'Emporer of Mexico,' Habsburgs were basically the Wolf of Wall St of the marriage market. 

Understanding the vastness of Habsburg's wealth and power goes a long way to explaining how Prague become such a beautiful and palatial city. The touch of Austro-Hungarian baroque architecture mixes with Bohemian spires and cathedrals, the occasional imperial broad avenue that splits into a dozen winding medieval lanes and paths, wide enough for a horse cart but not much larger. The 'old timey' Medieval Prague had its beginnings in the semi-mythological founding of the city, which tells a tale of young Bohemian princess Lebuse who is forced to marry someone, anyone, and so is beseeched to find the wisest man in the village. After walking for some time, Lebuse finds Premysl eating his lunch off the iron blade of his ploughshare, and marries him. 

With waxing and waning political and cultural significance in Central Europe throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, Prague had similarly mixed fortunes in modern history. In the late 1800's Czech culture and language became resurgent against the waning control of the Austro-Hungarian empire, and by the end of WW1 Czechoslovakia was an independent country with Prague as its capital. A fully 'Czech' modern European city flourished in the interwar period, but was soon occupied by the Nazis, to be replaced with the Soviets, each with harsh repression and authoritarian control. Spared large-scale destruction by Allied bombingin WW2 due to an 'American navigational error,' the rise and fall of different governments, along with their cultural, religious, and architectural stylings, is immediately apparent walking around the city. Stately baroque Austro-Hungarian palaces, Bohemian castles with bulging rounded curves and needle-like spires, and to the outskirts, the drab and utilitarian Soviet-era apartment blocks all remind the traveller that Prague was once a very important place, to a great many people. 

And that is Prague in a nutshell - a place that used to be important, and despite being a capital of tourism and culture, is locked into living in the shadow of its former imperial status. The heritage of the city center is both a reminder of this historical legacy, and also what prevents Prague from moving past it - the central highest value real-estate is essentially a protected area, with no new construction allowed that would disrupt Prague's unique antique skyline. And so development occurs at the outskirts, glass and steel jutting out from a forest of crumbling Soviet-era concrete infrastructure, and multi-lane highway interchanges soaring over cobblestone alleys. 

Apart from its history and architecture, Prague does have its charms. Summertime is excellent weather, the citizens are among the best dressed I had seen in all Europe, approachable and friendly to boot. Czech's, in a cute kind of way, have a special fondness for niceities like ice-cream cones, mini-golf, and cheap beer. 